update dill docs (#1091)
urbit/urbit.org: content/docs/arvo/dill/data-types.md

+++
title = "Data Types"
weight = 4
template = "doc.html"
+++

Here are the data types used by Dill, as defined in `/sys/lull.hoon`.

## `$blew`

```hoon
  +$  blew  [p=@ud q=@ud]
```

Terminal dimension; `p` is columns, `q` is rows. This structure is passed to Dill by the runtime in a [%blew](/docs/arvo/dill/tasks#blew) `task` whenever the dimensions of the terminal changes.

## `$belt`

```hoon
+$  belt
  $?  bolt
  $%  [%mod mod=?(%ctl %met %hyp) key=bolt]
      [%txt p=(list @c)]
      [%ctl p=@c]
      [%met p=@c]
  ==  ==
```

Terminal input.

> A `$belt` is passed to Dill in a [%belt](/docs/arvo/dill/tasks#belt) `task` by the runtime whenever there is input, such as a user typing in the console. This is the old `$belt` and is only used by the runtime, the new [$dill-belt](#dill-belt) is what is used between Dill and userspace.

Reviewer: > This is the old `$belt`

I know the comments in lull.hoon say "old" and "new", but this is a bit misleading, since these aren't actually separate versions of the api. I think they're meant as "old world" and "new world" respectively, as in talking to earth vs talking to mars.

The way I've chosen to describe these going forward is that `$belt` and `$blit` are _client_ input and output, whereas `$dill-belt` and `$dill-blit` are _arvo_ input and output, since these pairs comes from & go to the client and arvo respectively.

(This obviously also applies to the other mentions of old/new below.)

May either be a [$bolt](#bolt) or one of:

- `%mod` - Modifier (Ctrl, Meta or Hyper) plus [key].
- `%txt` - A series of characters
- `%ctl` - Ctrl+[key]

> - `%met` - Meta+[key]

Reviewer: Worth noting that these are deprecated in favor of `%mod` and will be removed as part of the terminal stack refactor.

## `$bolt`

```hoon
+$  bolt
  $@  @c
  $%  [%aro p=?(%d %l %r %u)]
      [%bac ~]
      [%del ~]
      [%hit r=@ud c=@ud]
      [%ret ~]
  ==
```

Simple input.

Either a single simple character or one of:

- `%aro` - Arrow keys.
- `%bac` - Backspace key.
- `%del` - Delete key.

> - `%hit` - Mouse click - `r` is row and `c` is column.

Reviewer: Also notable, and perhaps less obvious: row and column values are zero-indexed, with `[0 0]` being the _bottom left_-most coordinate on the screen (as opposed to the xterm(/unix?) standard of basing this on the _top_ left). This is documented [here](https://github.com/urbit/urbit/blob/42e8158be9a53d907c5141188cbd3d6760111632/pkg/urbit/vere/io/term.c#L397) and in various commit messages, but for some reason not in lull.hoon. My bad!

- `%ret` - Return (Enter) key.

## `$blit`

```hoon
+$  blit
  $%  [%bel ~]
      [%clr ~]
      [%hop p=@ud]
      [%klr p=stub]
      [%lin p=(list @c)]
      [%mor ~]
      [%sag p=path q=*]
      [%sav p=path q=@]
      [%url p=@t]
  ==
```

Terminal output.

> A `$blit` is given to the runtime by Dill in a [%blit](/docs/arvo/dill/tasks#blit) `task` when it wants to print some text, clear the screen, go _ding_ or what have you.

Reviewer: This is a gift, right? Also again, no dedicated blit section on the tasks page.

```suggestion
A `$blit` is given to the runtime by Dill in a [%blit](data-types#blit) `gift` when it wants to print some text, clear the screen, go _ding_ or what have you.
```

This is the old `$blit` which is only used between Dill and the runtime, the new [$dill-blit](#dill-blit) is used instead between userspace and Dill.

A `$blit` is one of:

- `%bel` - Ring the terminal bell.
- `%clr` - Clear the screen.
- `%hop` - Set cursor position, `p` specifies its position on the prompt line.
- `%klr` - Set styled line, the `$stub` specifies the text and style.
- `%lin` - Set current line, `p` contains the text.
- `%mor` - Newline.

> - `%sag` - Save to jamfile, typically in `/[pier]/.urb/put/`. `p` is `/[optional path]/[filename]/[extension]`. For example, `/foo/bar` will save it in `/[pier]/.urb/put/foo.bar` and `/a/b/c/foo/bar` will save it in `/[pier]/.urb/put/a/b/c/foo.bar`. `q` is the `noun` to `jam` and save in the file.

Reviewer: Fun fact: even the filename here is optional. You can totally `.ext 'abc'` in dojo and the resulting `%sag` will happily write to `.urb/put.ext`!

Looking at the implementation for these "save to file" blits now, it seems they also accept the _empty_ path. This might be considered no bueno, and we may or may not want to consider changing the type to disallow the empty path, but right now nothing that ships with userspace lets you use it that way.

> - `%sav` - Save to file. Same behaviour as `%sag` except `q` is an `atom` rather than a `noun` and therefore doesn't need to be `jam`med.

Reviewer: The atom is written to disk as if it were the bytestring in the tail of an `octs`. That is, `%sav`ing the cord `'abcdef'`, whose `@ux` value is `0x6665.6463.6261`, results in a unix file whose hex dump renders as `61 62 63 64 65 66`.
